## 1.5 Why the Iteration Protocol Is Designed as an Interface Rather Than Inheritance

One of the familiar concept in object-oriented programming(OOP) is **inheritance**. Inheritance is an essential concept for abstracting code and a useful mechanism for sharing functionality. It’s also frequently used in real-world development.

However, the iterator pattern, along with helper functions that support iterators, is based on  **interface** (or protocol/trait), rather than using inheritance. Why is this approach preferred? In this section, we’ll discuss why modern languages tend to discourage inheritance in language design principles and instead favor interfaces (or protocols, traits, etc.).

> **Note: Note: What "inheritance" and "interface" refer to in this chapter**
> - **Inheritance**: In this chapter, “inheritance” refers to class-level inheritance in TypeScript—e.g., `class A extends B {}`—where a subclass inherits both its properties and methods along with the implementation details of a parent class.
> - **Interface**: Here, “interface” refers to defining only the signatures (methods/properties and their types), which a class can then implement using `class X implements Y {}`. In TypeScript, interfaces do not contain implementations—only type signatures.
> - **Inheritance vs. Interface**: When we compare inheritance and interface here, we mean that “inheritance” is about sharing and extending implementation details between classes, whereas “interface” is about specifying signatures that implementing classes or literal objects are responsible for implementing.

### Even NodeList in the Web API Is Iterable

If you work with the DOM in JavaScript, you frequently encounter `NodeList`. A `NodeList` represents a collection of nodes in the document. This means you can seamlessly use `NodeList` with iteration-based features like the `for...of` loop and the spread operator.

##### [Code 1-45] `for...of`

```html
<ul>
  <li>1</li>
  <li>2</li>
  <li>3</li>
  <li>4</li>
  <li>5</li>
</ul>
<script>
  // Select all li elements
  const nodeList = document.querySelectorAll('li');
  
  // Use a for...of loop to iterate over the NodeList
  for (const node of nodeList) {
    console.log(node.textContent);
    // 1
    // 2
    // 3
    // 4
    // 5
  }
</script>
```

In the example above, `document.querySelectorAll('li')` returns all `<li>` elements as a `NodeList`. Since `NodeList` is iterable, we can iterate over each node using `for...of`. 

Naturally, we can also use the iterable functions we created earlier:

##### [Code 1-46] Using Our Custom Iterable Functions

```javascript
forEach(console.log,
  filter(x => x % 2 === 1,
    map(node => parseInt(node.textContent),
      document.querySelectorAll('li'))));
// 1
// 3
// 5

forEach(element => element.remove(),
  filter(node => parseInt(node.textContent) % 2 === 0,
    document.querySelectorAll('li')));
// removed: <li>2</li>
// removed: <li>4</li>
```

In the first code snippet, we log the odd numbers (`1, 3, 5`), and in the second, we remove `<li>2</li>` and `<li>4</li>` from the page by filtering for even text content.

### Why Do We Need to Solve This Using an Interface Instead of Inheritance?

Let’s explore why we need to solve this using an interface (the iteration protocol) instead of inheritance.

#### Why Use Iterables at All? Can’t We Just Use .map and .filter Instead?

In JavaScript, arrays already support higher-order functions like `.map`, `.filter`, and `.forEach`.

##### [Code 1-47] Trying `Array.prototype.map` on a `NodeList`

```typescript
const nodes: NodeList = document.querySelectorAll('li');

console.log(nodes[0], nodes[1], nodes.length);
// <li>1</li> <li>3</li> 3
// nodes looks like an Array.

nodes.map(node => node.textContent);
// Uncaught TypeError: nodes.map is not a function
```

The code above([Code 1-47]) will throw an error because `NodeList` is **not** an `Array`. Not only is `NodeList` not an `Array`, but as shown in [Code 1-48], it is defined differently and cannot directly use `Array` methods.

##### [Code 1-48] `NodeList` Interface

```typescript
interface NodeList {
  readonly length: number;
  item(index: number): Node | null;
  forEach(callbackfn: (value: Node, key: number, parent: NodeList) => void, thisArg?: any): void;
  [index: number]: Node;
}
```

By contrast, in the example from [Code 1-46], the iteration protocol allows `filter`, `map`, and `forEach` to be used directly on a `NodeList`.

#### Why weren’t these iterable data structures simply made to inherit from `Array`?

In OOP, inheritance is indeed a useful tool for abstracting code and share functionality. Yet in JavaScript and TypeScript’s standard libraries, you won’t find built-in classes inheriting from `Array`. Data structures like `Map`, `Set`, and `NodeList` may need some of the same core features as an `Array`, but they don’t inherit from it. Why?

The short answer is that they represent distinct data structures, each designed with its own unique characteristics and behaviors. They are **not** subsets of `Array`—neither externally nor internally. Tying them to `Array` through inheritance would create unnecessary complexity, hamper each structure’s ability to be optimized, and force them to evolve in lockstep. It also violates the overall design principles of JavaScript, and most other languages follow a similar approach. For instance, in Java, `List`, `Set`, and `Map` are separate interfaces for different structures, rather than classes all inheriting from a single parent.

Let’s take a closer look and expand our understanding of object-oriented paradigms.

- **`Array`** follows the typical characteristics and behavior of arrays and is optimized for contiguous storage of elements accessed by numeric index.
- **`Map`** stores key-value pairs, where each key is unique. It has no inherent order, but it provides quick key-based lookups.
- **`Set`** holds unique values, also with no inherent ordering, enabling fast membership checks.

Forcing these fundamentally different data structures to conform to `Array`’s characteristics and behavior through inheritance would be unnatural and inefficient.

#### But Isn’t `NodeList` Essentially `ArrayLike` with `index` and `length`?

- `NodeList` is a specialized data structure maintaining the order of elements in the DOM tree, primarily designed for DOM manipulation.
- `NodeList` comes in two modes: "live" and "static". A live `NodeList`updates automatically when the DOM changes.
- `Array` is static once created and must always be manually updated to add or remove elements.
- JavaScript engines manage arrays in a specific, optimized way for memory usage and performance.

In other words, forcing structurally and functionally distinct objects to share dependencies would introduce unwanted complexity and prevent optimization.

#### The Unintended Consequences One Decision Could Cause

Imagine there is someone responsible for defining language and browser standards. One day, while adding a new feature, they decide to make `NodeList` inherit from `Array`-and they ship that change. A month later:

- They realize they need to modify `Array`, only to realize that maintaining it has become significantly more complex due to its ingerited dependencies, including `NodeList`.
- Or they discover a bug in `NodeList` and want to revert it to a non-inheriting structure—but in the meantime, tons of developers have already deployed code relying on it.
- Even if they try to remove the inheritance relationship, they must retain all `Array` functionalities in `NodeList` to ensure backward compatibility.

This example shows why language-level designs avoid using inheritance too liberally.

#### How Do We Share Common Logic instead?

We’ve already seen that by establishing an **interface**—driven the iteration protocol—and by building higher-order functions around it, we can handle diverse data structures consistently, **without** inheritance. By leveraging the iteration protocol, we can achieve consistency across data structures without inheritance. Each data structure retains its unique characteristics while adhering to the same fundamental interface, allowing seamless interoperability.

Concretely, whether we’re dealing with an `Array`, `NodeList`, `Map`, a generator, or a custom user-defined iterable, the iteration protocol:

1. Solves external-structure polymorphism via the “iterable interface.”
2. Deals with internal data polymorphism by passing a function to your higher-order function (e.g., `map`, `filter`), which determines how each element is processed.

A notable distinction is that `Array`, `Map`, and `Set` are part of JavaScript’s standard library, while `NodeList` is provided by browser implementations. 

Finally, note that the iteration protocol is grounded in the **iterator pattern**, which is a classic OOP design pattern. By adopting the iterator pattern, we can separate common logic from specific data structures and provide a well-designed, maintainable approach—one that modern programming heavily relies on.

### Interfaces vs. Class Inheritance

**Interfaces** define a contract or specification for classes or objects to implement, enabling different classes to interact in a consistent way. By enforcing a shared behavior, interfaces foster polymorphism and code flexibility. When multiple classes implement the same interface, they all have the same method signatures, which can be invoked uniformly.

**Inheritance**, on the other hand, is the process of extending an existing class to reuse its attributes and methods. It boosts code reusability and extension possibilities. However, overusing inheritance incorrectly can tightly couple classes, complicating maintenance.

We’ve focused on the benefits of interfaces in this chapter, which might give the impression that interface are inherently superior to inheritance. However, they serve different purposes:

- Interfaces specify a contract that different classes fulfill to behave consistently.
- Inheritance shares an actual implementation that can be extended or modified.
- Interfaces often appear at the language or library design level.
- Inheritance is common at the SDK or application level—for example, extending a base window class in a GUI framework to create a customized window.

In later sections of this book, we’ll explore scenarios where inheritance is more appropriate. Ultimately, knowing when to choose an interface and when to use inheritance is crucial for writing good code.

---

## Navigation

- [Table of Contents](README.md)
- [Prev](1.4-Functional-Programming-with-Iterables.md)
- [Next](1.6-Summary.md)