## 2.2 Functional Type Systems in a Multi-Paradigm Language

Up to now, we’ve covered fundamental concepts and syntax for type inference, function types, and generics—all prerequisites for applying a type system to functional higher-order functions. In this section, we’ll examine how to apply a type system to iterable helper functions, shedding light on how functional type systems work in a multi-paradigm language.

### Revisiting the Iteration Protocol and Types

We will soon create higher-order functions that combine first-class functions with `Iterator`, `Iterable`, and `IterableIterator`. To do this, you should be well versed in the code and concepts introduced in Chapter 1. The following section reaffirms the key ideas we’ll need as we move forward.

##### [Code 2-17] Revisiting the `Iterator`, `Iterable`, and `IterableIterator` Types

```typescript
interface IteratorYieldResult<T> {
  done?: false;
  value: T;
}

interface IteratorReturnResult {
  done: true;
  value: undefined;
}

interface Iterator<T> { // A partial version of TS’s built-in `Iterator` interface
  next(): IteratorYieldResult<T> | IteratorReturnResult;
}

interface Iterable<T> {
  [Symbol.iterator](): Iterator<T>;
}

interface IterableIterator<T> extends Iterator<T> {
  [Symbol.iterator](): IterableIterator<T>;
}
```

Below is a checklist for review. We will learn how to apply the type system based on these concepts:

1. You’re aware of the three main iteration-protocol items: `Iterator`, `Iterable`, and `IterableIterator`.
2. Only iterables can be looped over with a `for...of`.
3. Only iterables can be expanded via the spread operator into an array.
4. To write a function that returns an `IterableIterator`, you can implement a return value of the form `{ next() {...}, [Symbol.iterator]() {...} }`, making it an iterator as well as an iterable.
5. Generators can produce iterators, and the result of a generator is an `IterableIterator`.
6. You know the relationship between `yield` in a generator and `next()` in an iterator.
7. By combining higher-order functions with iterators and leveraging the iteration protocol, you can build `forEach`, `map`, `filter`, ect. that interact seamlessly with language features.

> [Code 2-17] uses a simplified form to convey crucial ideas for this chapter. If you paste this directly into an editor, you may get duplicate type or inference errors. The official iterator interface in TypeScript can be found by referring to the `lib.es2015.iterable.d.ts` file.

### Functional Higher-Order Functions with a Type System

The higher-order functional helpers utilizing the iterator pattern are built around the iterable data structure, so we can call them iterable helper functions. This section explores how to apply a type system to these iterable helper functions.

#### `forEach` and Its Type

The `forEach` function processes each element of a given iterable with a specified function. Below is an implementation using generics:

##### [Code 2-18] A `forEach` Function and Its Type

```typescript
function forEach<A>(f: (a: A) => void, iterable: Iterable<A>): void {
  for (const a of iterable) {
    f(a);
  }
}

const array = [1, 2, 3];
forEach(a => console.log(a.toFixed(2)), array); // [a: number]
// 1.00
// 2.00
// 3.00
```

Let’s break down the type definition and runtime flow of [Code 2-18]. This approach underscores the interconnectedness of iterables, higher-order functions, first-class functions, and generics:

1. We write `<A>` next to `forEach` to declare that the function will use generic type `A`.
2. We use `A` to define the type of the function `f` as `(a: A) => void`.
3. The function parameter `a` in `f` is typed as `A`.
4. We define `iterable` as `Iterable<A>`.
5. Conceptually, we can say “We declared `<A>` and used `A` for both `a: A` and `Iterable<A>`, ensuring that the element type of `iterable` is the same as the function parameter type of `f`.”
6. Because `iterable` is `Iterable<A>`, `a` of `for (const a of iterable)` is typed as `A`.
7. In the example, we passed `array: number[]`, so `Iterable<A>` becomes `Iterable<number>`—thus `f`’s parameter `a` is `number`.
8. Thanks to generics, the function parameter `a` is correctly inferred as `number`, making `toFixed(2)` safe to call.

#### `map` and Its Type

The type of the map function is as follows.

##### [Code 2-19] A Generator-Based `map` Function and Its Type

```typescript
function* map<A, B>(f: (a: A) => B, iterable: Iterable<A>): IterableIterator<B> {
  for (const a of iterable) {
    yield f(a);
  }
}

const array = ['1', '2', '3'];
const mapped = map(a => parseInt(a), array); // [a: string]
// [const mapped: IterableIterator<number>]
const array2: number[] = [...mapped];
console.log(array2); 
// [1, 2, 3]

const [head] = map(a => a.toUpperCase(), ['a', 'b', 'c']); 
console.log(head); // [head: string]
// A
```

Here’s the breakdown:

1. We create generic types `A` and `B`, by writing the `map<A, B>` function.
2. `map` takes a function `f: (a: A) => B` that accepts an input of type `A` and produces an output of type `B`, along with an `Iterable<A>`, returning an `IterableIterator<B>`.
3. In the first example, because the input array is `Iterable<string>`, TypeScript infers `A` as `string`.
4. The arrow function `a => parseInt(a)` returns a `number`, so `B` becomes `number`. Hence `map(a => parseInt(a), array)` is `IterableIterator<number>`.
5. Consequently, `mapped` is inferred as `IterableIterator<number>`, and `array2`, which is the result of spreading `mapped` into an array, is of type `number[]`.
6. In the second case with `[head]`, the element type is inferred as `string`.

By properly utilizing TypeScript's type system, you can implement higher-order functions with generics flexibly, ensuring type safety.

#### `filter` and Its Type

`filter` can be described as a function that takes an `Iterable<A>` and returns a filtered `IterableIterator<A>`.

##### [Code 2-20] A Generator-Based `filter` Function and Its Type

```typescript
function* filter<A>(f: (a: A) => boolean, iterable: Iterable<A>): IterableIterator<A> {
  for (const a of iterable) {
    if (f(a)) {
      yield a;
    }
  }
}

const array = [1, 2, 3, 4];
const filtered = filter(a => a % 2 === 0, array); // [a: number]

const array2: number[] = [...filtered]; // [const filtered: IterableIterator<number>]
console.log(array2);
// [2, 4]
```

> We'll skip an in-depth breakdown here, but it follows the same flow as the `map` explanation. I recommend you try writing the code yourself, paying attention to how the types are applied. By practicing alongside the examples, you'll gradually become more concise and focus on the key points of each example, saving the reader's time with more concise explanations and providing richer insights. 

`filter` uses a generic type `A`. THe type of the argument `a` in the function `f` and the type of the elements in the `iterable` are both set fo `A`. The type of the elements in the returned `IterableIterator` is also set to `A` because the `filter` function does not modify the elements themselves, but only filters them.

#### `reduce` and Its Type

Finally, let’s write a concise `reduce` function with type declarations:

##### [Code 2-21] `reduce` Function and Its Type

```typescript
function reduce<A, Acc>(
  f: (acc: Acc, a: A) => Acc, acc: Acc, iterable: Iterable<A>
): Acc {
  for (const a of iterable) {
    acc = f(acc, a);
  }
  return acc;
}

const array = [1, 2, 3];
const sum = reduce((acc, a) => acc + a, 0, array);
console.log(sum); // [const sum: number]
// 6

const strings = ['a', 'b', 'c'];
const abc = reduce((acc, a) => `${acc}${a}`, '', strings);
console.log(abc); // [const abc: string]
// abc
```

`reduce` takes a function `(acc: Acc, a: A) => Acc` as its parameter, along with an initial value `acc: Acc` and an `Iterable<A>`, returning a final `Acc`. Let’s break that down:

1. We declare generic type `A` and `Acc`, using `reduce<A, Acc>`.
2. We pass an initial value `acc: Acc` and an `Iterable<A>` whose elements are `A`.
3. We pass a function `f(acc, a) => newAcc` that takes an initial value of type `Acc` and the current value of type `A`, returning a new accumulated value of type `Acc`.
4. The function iterates over the elements, calling `f(acc, a)` to update `acc`.
5. Finally, `reduce` returns the accumulated `acc` of type `Acc`.

Defining the function from a type perspective enables clearer and more accurate communication among developers.

#### `reduce` Overloads

In JavaScript, `Array.prototype.reduce` allows omitting the initial value. If there’s no initial value, the first element becomes the accumulator, but if the array is empty, it throws an error. Our iterable-based `reduce` aims for the same functionality:

- If an initial value is provided, we have three parameters.
- If the initial value is omitted, we only take `f` and `iterable`, with the first element used as the accumulator.
- If the initial value is omitted and array is empty, it can’t return a meaningful result, so it throws an error.

We handle these cases with function overloading. Function overloading or method overloading is where you define multiple signatures for the same function name, but provide only one implementation. That way, a single function name can accept different types of parameters.

##### [Code 2-22] `reduce(f, iterable);`

```typescript
function baseReduce<A, Acc>(
  f: (acc: Acc, a: A) => Acc, acc: Acc, iterator: Iterator<A>
): Acc {
  while (true) {
    const { done, value } = iterator.next();
    if (done) break;
    acc = f(acc, value);
  }
  return acc;
}

// (1)
function reduce<A, Acc>(
  f: (acc: Acc, a: A) => Acc, acc: Acc, iterable: Iterable<A>
): Acc;
// (2)
function reduce<A, Acc>(
  f: (a: A, b: A) => Acc, iterable: Iterable<A>
): Acc;
function reduce<A, Acc>(
  f: (a: Acc | A, b: A) => Acc, 
  accOrIterable: Acc | Iterable<A>, 
  iterable?: Iterable<A>
): Acc {
  if (iterable === undefined) { // (3)
    const iterator = (accOrIterable as Iterable<A>)[Symbol.iterator]();
    const { done, value: acc } = iterator.next();
    if (done) throw new TypeError("'reduce' of empty iterable with no initial value");
    return baseReduce(f, acc, iterator) as Acc;
  } else { // (4)
    return baseReduce(f, accOrIterable as Acc, iterable[Symbol.iterator]());
  }
}
```

The explanation of the function signature (1, 2) and implementation (3, 4) is as follows.

1. **`reduce<A, Acc>(f: (acc: Acc, a: A) => Acc, acc: Acc, iterable: Iterable<A>): Acc`**
   - Declares generic `A` and`Acc`.
   - Takes an initial value `acc: Acc` and `Iterable<A>`.
   - Takes `(acc: Acc, a: A) => Acc` as a parameter and calculates the accumulated value.
   - Finally returns `Acc`.

2. **`reduce<A, Acc>(f: (a: A, b: A) => Acc, iterable: Iterable<A>): Acc`**
   - Declare generic `A` and `Acc`.
   - Takes `Iterable<A>` and `(a:A, b: A) => Acc` as parameters without an initial value.
   - Calculates the accumulated value using the first element of the iterable.
   - Finally returns `Acc`

3. **No `iterable` Provided (iterable === undefined)**
   - The second parameter, `accOrIterable`, is an iterable. 
   - Calling `[Symbol.iterator]()` to get an iterator and using `iterator.next()` to retrieve the first element.
   - If empty, throw an error. Otherwise, execute `baseReduce` function.

4. **Taking three parameters (else)**
   - The second argument `accOrIterable` is indeed the initial value and `iterable` is an iterable.
   - Call `baseReduce` to update the accumulated value by iterating over the elements of the iterator and appling `f(acc, value)`.
   - Finally, return the accumulated value.

Below is an example of this `reduce` usage:

##### [Code 2-22a] Using `reduce`

```typescript
// First reduce case: with an initial value
const array = [1, 2, 3];
const sum = reduce((acc, a) => acc + a, 0, array);
console.log(sum); // [const sum: number]
// 6

const strings = ['a', 'b', 'c'];
const abc = reduce((acc, a) => `${acc}${a}`, '', strings);
console.log(abc); // [const abc: string]
// abc

// Second reduce case: no initial value
const array2 = [1, 2, 3];
const sum2 = reduce((a, b) => a + b, array2);
console.log(sum2); // [const sum2: number]
// 6

const words = ['hello', 'beautiful', 'world'];
const sentence = reduce((a, b) => `${a} ${b}`, words);
console.log(sentence); // [const sentence: string]
// hello beautiful world

const array3 = [3, 2, 1];
const str = reduce((a, b) => `${a}${b}`, array3);
console.log(str); // [const str: string]
// 321
```

In example like `hello beautiful world`, omitting the initial value can make the code more concise and improve readability.

#### Error Handling in `reduce`

When JavaScript’s `reduce` is called without an initial value, it begins iteration using the array’s first element as the initial value. If the array is empty, there’s no element to serve as the initial value, so it throws a `TypeError` and stops execution. Whether it’s `Array.prototype.reduce`, an Iterable Helpers–based `reduce`, or the `reduce` we’ve implemented here, all are designed to propagate an error when encountering an empty array or empty iterable in a no-initial-value scenario.

So how should we view and manage such error handling?

1. **Explicitly provide an initial value.**
   - This is the simplest solution.
   - Even if the array is empty, `reduce` proceeds without an error, returning a user-defined initial value (for example, `0` or `''`).
   - This method makes it clear what to return when encountering an empty array.

2. **However, an initial value alone does not solve every scenario.**
   - For example, in something like the “hello beautiful world” case in [Code 2-22a], adding an initial value means your helper function (`f`) would need an `if` statement to handle a “blank” first iteration.
   - In that case, every iteration might pass through an additional conditional, complicating your code.
   - Ultimately, whether providing an initial value is appropriate depends on how the overall logic and your helper function operate.

3. **Check for an empty array in advance and early-return a default value.**
   - if empty arrays are expected and a default value make sense, this method can be used.
   - For example, something like ```arr => arr.length === 0 ? '' : arr.reduce((a, b) => `${a} ${b}`)```.
   - This works with data structures such as `Array` or `Set`, where the length is known beforehand.

4. **Use try/catch to handle the error.**
   - If an empty array (or empty iterable) isn’t part of your normal operating range, and you have no reason to use an initial value, you can handle it with `try/catch`,
   - Or you can definitively decide “This is indeed an error,” in which case you let it throw, expecting the error to be caught somewhere if needed.
   - In short, the developer should know it’s “out of normal range” and must be prepared to detect the error at some final stage.

5. **If the iterator is lazy:**
   - Before passing a lazy iterator to `reduce`, you can either convert it to an array to check its length beforehand,
   - Or defer evaluation until `reduce` processes it, handling or throwing an error if the iterator is empty.
   - The first approach allows you to "preemptively check for emptiness and return a default value".
   - The second scenario assumes that "if an empty iterator is passed to `reduce` and triggers an error, you either let it throw or handle it with `try/catch`."
   - Ultimately, using `reduce` without an initial value on a lazy iterator requires deciding whether to handle errors explicitly or assume such a scenario won't occur-and choosing the appropriate approach accordingly. 

> In Chapters up to 4 of this book, we present various perspectives on error handling and handling values in optional scenarios. Revisiting the discussion here after reading that part will likely be even more beneficial.

### Function Signatures and Nested Type Inference

So far, we’ve only run these typed higher-order functions individually. But well-typed functions maintain strong inference even when nested. Since each higher-order function can infer the callback parameter’s type, developers get full type safety with minimally manual annotations.

##### [Code 2-23] `map + filter + forEach`

```typescript
function* naturals(end = Infinity): IterableIterator<number> {}
function forEach<A>(f: (a: A) => void, iterable: Iterable<A>): void {}
function* map<A, B>(f: (a: A) => B, iterable: Iterable<A>): IterableIterator<B> {}
function* filter<A>(f: (a: A) => boolean, iterable: Iterable<A>): IterableIterator<A> {}

function printNumber(n: number) {
   return console.log(n);
}

forEach(printNumber,
  map(n => n * 10, // [n: number]
    filter(n => n % 2 === 1, // [n: number]
      naturals(5))));

forEach(printNumber,
  filter(n => n % 2 === 1, // [n: number]
    map(text => parseInt(text), // [text: string]
      map(el => el.textContent!, // [el: HTMLDivElement] [Node.textContent: string | null]
        document.querySelectorAll('div')))));
```

At the top, we've kept function signatures minimal to enable type inference. In these examples, you can see how parameters are inferred (comment like `[n: number]`), ensuring that `printNumber` receives a `number`.

We've now studied in detail how to apply a type system to functional higher-order functions and iterable helpers. By applying these concepts, you can build even safer higher-order functions. A well-structured set of such functions leads to safer, more efficient, flexible, and productive functional programming.

---

## Navigation

- [Table of Contents](README.md)
- [Prev](2.1-Type-Inference,-Function-Types,-and-Generics.md)
- [Next](2.3-Multiparadigm-Languages-and-Metaprogramming-–-From-LISP.md)